The first book of Moses, called Genesis.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep, and
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
And God said, Let there be light, and there was light.
And God saw the light, that it was good, and God divided the light from the darkness.
And God called the light day, and the darkness He called night, and the evening and the morning
were the first day.
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide
the waters from the waters.
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from
the waters which were above the firmament, and it was so.
And God called the firmament heaven, and the evening and the morning were the second day.
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let
the dry land appear, and it was so.
And God called the dry land earth, and the gathering together of the waters called He
seas, and God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree
yielding fruit after His kind, whose seed is in itself upon the earth, and it was so.
And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after His kind, and the tree
yielding fruit whose seed was in itself after His kind, and God saw that it was good.
And the evening and the morning were the third day.
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night,
and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years, and let them be for
lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, and it was so.
And God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light
to rule the night, He made the stars also.
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, and to rule
the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness, and God saw that
it was good.
And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl
that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought
forth abundantly after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind, and God saw that
it was good.
And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas,
and let fowl multiply in the earth.
And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and
creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind, and it was so.
And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and
everything that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let us make man in our image after our likeness, and let them have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over
all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, male and female
created he them.
And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the
earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed which is upon the face of
all the earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed.
To you it shall be for meat.
And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth
upon the earth wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat.
And it was so.
And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good, and the evening
and the morning were the sixth day.
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and he rested on the seventh
day from all his work which he had made.
And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from
all his work which God created and made.
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the
day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens, and every plant of the field before
it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew.
For the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to
till the ground.
But there went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground.
And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life, and man became a living soul.
And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there he put the man whom he
had formed.
And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight
and good for food, the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge
of good and evil.
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was parted and
became into four heads.
The name of the first is Pison, that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilla,
where there is gold, and the gold of that land is good, there is Bedelium and the Onyx
Stone.
And the name of the second river is Gihon, the same is it that compasseth the whole land
of Ethiopia.
And the name of the third river is Hittical, that is it which goeth toward the east of
Syria, and the fourth river is Euphrates.
And the Lord God took the man and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to
keep it.
And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely
eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat of it, for in
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone, I will make him and
help meet for him.
And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field and every fowl of
the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them, and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature that was the name thereof.
And Adam gave names to all cattle and to the fowl of the air and to every beast of the
field, but for Adam there was not found and help meet for him.
And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and he took one of
his ribs and closed up the flesh instead thereof, and the rib which the Lord God had taken from
the man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called
woman because she was taken out of man.
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife,
and they shall be one flesh.
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made,
and he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, He shall not eat of every tree of the
garden?
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden,
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, He shall
not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said unto the woman, He shall not surely die.
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall
be as God's, knowing good and evil.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they sewed
fig-leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and
Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees
of the garden.
And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked, and
I hid myself.
And he said, Who told thee that thou was naked?
Hast thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat?
And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and
I did eat.
And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done?
And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.
And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above
all cattle, and above every beast of the field.
Upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed.
It shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.
Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception, in sorrow thou
shalt bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee.
And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten
of the tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it, cursed is the ground
for thy sake, in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life.
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the
field.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground, for out
of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.
And Adam called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living.
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins and clothe them.
And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of us to know good and evil, and now
lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat and live for ever.
Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden to till the ground from
whence he was taken.
So he drove out the man, and he placed at the east of the Garden of Eden cherubims and
a flaming sword which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life.
And Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man
from the Lord.
And she again bare his brother Abel.
And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
And in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an
offering unto the Lord.
And Abel he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof.
And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering, but unto Cain and to his offering
he had not respect, and Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.
And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen?
If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted, and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the
door, and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.
And Cain talked with Abel his brother, and it came to pass when they were in the field
that Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him.
And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother?
And he said, I know not, am I my brother's keeper?
And he said, What hast thou done?
The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground.
And now art thou cursed from the earth which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's
blood from thy hand.
When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength, a
fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.
And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater than I can bear.
Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall
I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth, and it shall come to
pass that every one that findeth me shall slay me.
And the Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on
him sevenfold.
And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.
And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord and dwelt in the land of Nod on the east
of Eden.
And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and bare Enoch, and he builded a city, and
called the name of the city after the name of his son, Enoch.
And unto Enoch was born Ired, and Ired begat Mehujael, and Mehujael begat Methusael, and
Methusael begat Lamech.
And Lamech took unto him two wives, the name of the one was Ada, and the name of the other
Zilla.
And Ada bare Jabal, he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.
And his brother's name was Jubal, he was the father of all such as handle the harp and
organ.
And Zilla she also bare Tubalcain, an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron, and
the sister of Tubalcain was Nehema.
And Lamech said unto his wives Ada and Zilla, Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, hearken
unto my speech, for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.
If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech, seventy and sevenfold.
And Adam knew his wife again, and she bare a son, and called his name Seth.
For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.
And to Seth, to him also, there was born a son, and he called his name Enos.
Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.
This is the book of the generations of Adam.
In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him, male and female created
he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created.
And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness after
his image, and called his name Seth.
And the days of Adam, after he had begotten Seth, were eight hundred years, and he begat
sons and daughters, and all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years,
and he died.
And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos, and Seth lived after he begat
Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the days of Seth
were nine hundred and twelve years, and he died.
And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Kainan, and Enos lived after he begat Kainan eight
hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the days of Enos were
nine hundred and five years, and he died.
And Kainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalalel, and Kainan lived after he begat
Mahalalel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the days
of Kainan were nine hundred and ten years, and he died.
And Mahalalel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared, and Mahalalel lived after
he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the
days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety and five years, and he died.
And Jared lived a hundred and sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch, and Jared lived
after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the
days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty and two years, and he died.
And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah, and Enoch walked with God
after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters, and all the
days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years, and Enoch walked with God, and
he was not, for God took him.
And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech, and Methuselah
lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters,
and all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years, and he died.
And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat his son, and he called his
name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed.
And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons
and daughters, and all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years,
and he died.
And Noah was five hundred years old, and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply
on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw the
daughters of men, that they were fair, and they took them wives of all which they chose.
And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh,
yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.
There were giants in the earth in those days, and also after that, when the sons of God
came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty
men which were of old, men of renown.
And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his
heart.
And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth,
both man and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air, for it repenteth
me that I have made them.
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.
These are the generations of Noah.
Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.
And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japeth.
The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
And God looked upon the earth, and behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted
his way upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled
with violence through them, and behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make thee an ark of gopher wood, rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within
and without with pitch.
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of.
The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and
the height of it thirty cubits.
A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above, and the
door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof, with lower, second, and third stories
shalt thou make it.
And behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh
wherein is the breath of life from under heaven, and every thing that is in the earth shall
die.
But with thee will I establish my covenant, and thou shalt come into the ark thou and
thy sons and thy wife and thy sons' wives with thee.
And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark
to keep them alive with thee, they shall be male and female.
Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the
earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee to keep them alive.
And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee, and
it shall be for food for thee and for them.
Thus did Noah, according to all that God commanded him, so did he.
And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark, for thee have
I seen righteous before me in this generation.
Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female, and of
of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female, to keep seed alive upon the
face of all the earth.
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights,
and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him.
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark,
because of the waters of the flood.
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that
creepeth upon the earth, there went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and
the female, as God had commanded Noah.
And it came to pass after seven days that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of
the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows
of heaven were opened.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japeth, the sons of Noah, and
Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark, they and every beast
after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.
And they went in unto Noah into the ark two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath
of life.
And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him, and
the Lord shut him in.
And the flood was forty days upon the earth, and the waters increased and bare up the ark,
and it was lift up above the earth.
And the waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the earth, and the ark went upon
the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high hills that were
under the whole heaven were covered.
Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail, and the mountains were covered.
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl and of cattle and of beast and
of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth and every man, all in whose nostrils
was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.
And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man
and cattle and the creeping things and the fowl of the heaven, and they were destroyed
from the earth, and Noah only remained alive and they that were with him in the ark.
And the waters prevailed upon the earth and hundred and fifty days.
And God remembered Noah and every living thing and all the cattle that was with him in the
ark, and God made a wind to pass over the earth and the waters assuaged.
The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped and the rain from heaven
was restrained, and the waters returned from off the earth continually, and after the end
of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.
And the ark rested in the seventh month on the seventeenth day of the month upon the
mountains of Ararat.
And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month, in the tenth month on the
first day of the month were the tops of the mountains seen.
And it came to pass at the end of forty days that Noah opened the window of the ark which
he had made, and he sent forth a raven which went forth to and fro until the waters were
dried up from off the earth.
Also he sent forth a dove from him to see if the waters were abated from off the face
of the ground.
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned under him into
the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth.
Then he put forth his hand and took her and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
And he stayed yet other seven days, and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark, and
the dove came into him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth was an olive-leaf plucked
off, so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
And he stayed yet other seven days, and sent forth the dove, which returned not again unto
him any more.
And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first
day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth, and Noah removed the covering
of the ark, and looked, and behold, the face of the ground was dry.
And in the second month, on the seventh and twentieth day of the month, was the earth
dried.
And God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth of the ark thou and thy wife and thy sons
and thy sons' wives with thee.
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of all flesh, both of fowl and
of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, that they may breed
abundantly in the earth and be fruitful and multiply upon the earth.
And Noah went forth and his sons and his wife and his sons' wives with him.
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth
after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast and of every clean
fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
And the Lord smelled a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse
the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth, neither will I again smite any more every thing living as I have done.
While the earth remaineth seed-time and harvest and cold and heat and summer and winter and
day and night shall not cease.
And God blessed Noah and his sons and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply and replenish
the earth, and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth,
and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes
of the sea, into your hand are they delivered.
Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given
you all things.
But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.
And surely your blood of your lives will I require, at the hand of every beast will I
require it, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man's brother will I require
the life of man.
Whoso shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made
he man.
And you, be ye fruitful and multiply, bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply
therein.
And God spake unto Noah and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I establish my
covenant with you, and with your seed after you, and with every living creature that is
with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you, from
all that go out of the ark to every beast of the earth.
And I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more
by the waters of a flood, neither shall there be any more of flood to destroy the earth.
And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you, and every
living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations.
I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and
the earth.
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be
cloud, and I will remember my covenant which is between me and you and every living creature
of all flesh, and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting
covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant which I have established between
me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
And the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark were Shem and Ham and Japheth, and Ham
is the father of Canaan.
These were the three sons of Noah, and of them was the whole earth overspread.
And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard, and he drank of the wine,
and was drunken, and he was uncovered within his tent.
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.
And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward,
and covered the nakedness of their father, and their faces were backward, and they saw
not their father's nakedness.
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.
And he said, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant.
God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be
his servant.
And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years, and he died.
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and unto
them were sons born after the flood.
The sons of Japheth, Gomer, and Magog, and Medai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshach,
and Tyrus.
And the sons of Gomer, Ashkenaz, and Riphoth, and Togarmah.
And the sons of Javan, Elisha, and Tarshish, Kitim, and Dodenim.
By these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after his tongue,
after their families, in their nations.
And the sons of Ham, Cush, and Misraim, and Foot, and Canaan.
And the sons of Cush, Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Rehema, and Sabtika.
And the sons of Rehema, Sheba, and Dedan.
And Cush begat Nimrod, he began to be a mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter before
the Lord, wherefore it is said, even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the
beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Urek, and Akkad, and Calni, in the land of Shinar.
Out of that land went forth Asher, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Cala,
and Rezin, between Nineveh and Cala, the same as a great city.
And Misraim begat Ludim, and Adimim, and Lahabim, and Naphtihim, and Pathrasim, and Chazlehim,
out of whom came Philistim, and Kaftorim.
And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and
the Gergosite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and the Arvidite, and the
Zemurite, and the Haemothite. And afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread
abroad.
And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon as thou comest to Girar, unto Gaza,
as thou goest unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Adma, and Zeboam, even unto Lesha. These
are the sons of Ham after their families, after their tongues, in their countries,
and in their nations.
Unto Shem also the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder,
even to him were children born. The children of Shem, Elam and Asher, and Arphaxad, and
Lod, and Aram. And the children of Aram, Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. And Arphaxad
begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber. And unto Eber were born two sons, the name of one was
Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided, and his brother's name was Joktan.
And Joktan begat El-Modad, and Shelef, and Hazar-Meveth, and Jira, and Hadorim, and Uzzal,
and Dikla, and Obel, and Abimeel, and Sheba, and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these
were the sons of Joktan. And their dwelling was from Misha as thou goest unto Seafar,
a mount of the east. These are the sons of Shem after their families, after their tongues,
in their lands, after their nations. These are the families of the sons of Noah, after
their generations, in their nations, and by these were the nations divided in the earth
after the flood.
And the whole earth was of one language and of one speech. And it came to pass, as they
journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt
there. And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly.
And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar. And they said, Go to, let
us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us
a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower which the children of men builded.
And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language, and this they
begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand
one another's speech. So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all
the earth, and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel,
because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth, and from thence did the
Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.
These are the generations of Shem. Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxid two
years after the flood. And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxid five hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters. And Arphaxid lived five and thirty years, and begat Sala. And
Arphaxid lived after he begat Sala four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Sala lived thirty years, and begat Ybar. And Sala lived after he begat Ybar four hundred
and three years, and begat sons and daughters. And Ybar lived four and thirty years, and
begat Peleg. And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and
thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. And Peleg lived thirty
years, and begat Riou. And Peleg lived after he begat Riou two hundred
and nine years, and begat sons and daughters. And Riou lived two and
thirty years, and begat Siirog. And Riou lived after he begat Siirog
two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Si-ragh lived thirty years, and begat Nahor.
And Si-ragh lived after he begat Nahor, two hundred years, and begat sons
and daughters.
And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah.
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah, and a hundred and nineteen years,
and begat sons and daughters.
And Tyra lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Now these are the generations of Tyra. Tyra begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran, and Haran begat
Lot. And Haran died before his father Tyra in the land of his nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.
And Abram and Nahor took them wives. The name of Abram's wife was Sarai, and the name of
Nahor's wife, Milka, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milka, and the father of Iska.
But Sarai was barren, she had no child. And Tyra took Abram his son, and Lot the son of
Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife, and they went forth
with them from Ur of the Chaldees to go into the land of Canaan, and they came unto Haran
and dwelt there. And the days of Tyra were two hundred and five years, and Tyra died
in Haran.
Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred,
and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee. And I will make of thee
a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing.
And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee, and in thee shall
all families of the earth be blessed.
So Abram departed as the LORD had spoken unto him, and Lot went with him, and Abram was
seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife,
and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that
they had gotten in Haran, and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan, and into the
land of Canaan they came.
And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sycam, unto the plain of Moray, and
the Canaanite was then in the land. And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy
seed will I give this land, and their ability an altar unto the LORD who appeared unto him.
And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent,
having Bethel on the west, and Haei on the east, and there he builded an altar unto the
LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD. And Abram journeyed, going on still toward
the south.
And there was a famine in the land, and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there, for
the famine was grievous in the land. And it came to pass, when he was come near to
enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art
a fair woman to look upon. Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see
thee, that they shall say, This is his wife, and they will kill me, but they will save
thee alive.
Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and my
soul shall live because of thee.
And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the
woman, that she was very fair. The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her
before Pharaoh, and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house. And he entreated Abram well
for her sake, and he had sheep, and oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, and maid-servants,
and she-asses, and camels. And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because
of Sarai, Abram's wife. And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast
done unto me? Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? Why saidst thou, She is
my sister? So I might have taken her to me to wife. Now therefore, behold thy wife, take
her, and go thy way. And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him, and they sent him
away, and his wife, and all that he had.
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he had, and lot with him,
into the south. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. And he went
on his journeys from the south, even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at
the beginning, between Bethel and Hiai, unto the place of the altar which he had made there
at the first, and there Abram called on the name of the Lord. And lot also which went
with Abram had flocks, and herds, and tents. And the land was not able to bear them that
they might dwell together, for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
And there was a strife between the herdsmen of Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of lot's cattle,
and the Canaanite and Perizzite then dwelled in the land. And Abram said unto lot,
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and thy
herdsmen, for we be brethren. Is not the whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee,
from me. If thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right, or if thou depart
to the right hand, then I will go to the left. And lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all
the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere, before the Lord destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto
Zohar. Then lot chose him all the plain of Jordan, and lot journeyed east, and they separated
themselves the one from the other. Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and lot dwelled in
the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent towards Sodom. But the men of Sodom were wicked
and sinners before the Lord exceedingly. And the Lord said unto Abram, after that lot
was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art,
northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward, for all the land which thou seest,
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed, for ever. And I will make thy seed as the dust
of the earth, so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed
also be numbered. Arise, walk through the land, in the length of it, and in the breadth
of it, for I will give it unto thee. Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt
in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord.
And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel,
king of Shinar, Eriak, king of Alasar, Kederleomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of nations,
that these made war with Bira, king of Sodom, and with Bersha, king of Gomorrah, Shinab,
king of Adma, and Shemebr, king of Zeboyim, and the king of Bela, which is Zohar. All
these were joined together in the vale of Sidim, which is the salt sea. Twelve years
they served Kederleomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled. And in the fourteenth
year came Kederleomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Raphayims in
Ash-Tiroth-Kirneim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Imims in Shavakirithayim, and the
Horites in their Mount Seir, unto El-Piran, which is by the wilderness. And they returned
and came to Enmishpet, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites and
also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazesan-Temar. And there went out the king of Sodom, and
the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Adma, and the king of Zeboyim, and the king of Bela,
the same is Zohar, and they joined battle with them in the vale of Sidim, with Kederleomer,
the king of Elam, and with Tidal, king of Nations, and Amreful, king of Shinar, and
king of Alesar, four kings with five. And the vale of Sidim was full of slime-pits,
and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled and fell there, and they that remained fled to
the mountain. And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their victuals
and went their way. And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom and his
goods, and departed. And there came one that had escaped and told Abram the Hebrew, for
he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshkol and brother of Anor, and
these were confederate with Abram. And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive,
he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, 318, and pursued them unto Dan.
And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and
pursued them unto Hobar, which is on the left hand of Damascus. And he brought back all
the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and
the people. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter
of Kederleomer and of the kings that were with him, at the vale of Sheva, which is the
king's dale. And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine, and he was the
priest of the Most High God. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the Most
High God, possessor of heaven and earth, and blessed be the Most High God, which hath delivered
thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all. And the king of Sodom said
unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself. And Abram said to the
king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord, the Most High God, the possessor
of heaven and earth, that I will not take from a thread even to a shoe-latchet, and
that I will not take anything that is thine, lest thou shouldst say, I have made Abram
rich. Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went
with me, Anor, Eshkol, and Mamrie, let them take their portion.
After these things the word of the Lord came
unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward. And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless,
and the steward of my house is this Eleazar of Damascus? And Abram said, Behold, to me
thou hast given no seed, and lo, one born in my house is mine heir. And behold, the
word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir, but he that shall
come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir. And he brought him forth abroad,
and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars if thou be able to number them.
And he said unto him, So shall thy seed be. And he believed in the Lord, and he counted
it to him for righteousness. And he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of
oar of the Chaldees to give thee this land to inherit it. And he said, Lord God, whereby
shall I know that I shall inherit it? And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three
years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove,
and a young pigeon. And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and
laid each piece one against another, but the birds divided he not. And when the fowls came
down upon the carcasses, Abram drove them away. And when the sun was going down, a deep
sleep fell upon Abram, and lo, and horror of great darkness fell upon him. And he said
unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger and a land that is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years. And also
that nation whom they shall serve will I judge, and afterward shall they come out with
great substance. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, thou shalt be buried in
a good old age. But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again, for the iniquity
of the Amorites is not yet full. And it came to pass that when the sun went down, and it
was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.
In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given
this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates, the Kenites,
and the Canisites, and the Cadmonites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the
Ephemes, and the Amorites, and the Caninites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.
Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bear him no children, and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose
name was Hagar. And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from
bearing. I pray thee, go in unto my maid. It may be that I may obtain children by her.
And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai. And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid,
the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her
husband Abram to be his wife. And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived, and when
she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes. And Sarai said unto
Abram, My wrong be upon thee. I have given my maid into thy bosom, and when she saw that
she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes. The Lord judged between me and thee. But Abram
said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand, due to her as it pleaseth thee. And
when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face. And the angel of the Lord found
her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to shore. And
he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou, and whither wilt thou go? And she said,
I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai. And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return
to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands. And the angel of the Lord said
unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son,
and shalt call his name Ishmael, because the Lord hath heard thy affliction. And he will
be a wild man, his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him, and
he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren. And she called the name of the Lord
that spake unto her, Thou God, seest me. For she said, Have I also here looked after him
that seeth me? Wherefore the well was called Bir-Lehi-Roy. Behold, it is between Kadesh
and Bir-Ed. And Hagar bare Abram a son, and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar
bare, Ishmael. And Abram was fourscore and six years old when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine,
the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, walk before me,
and be thou perfect, and I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee
exceedingly. And Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him, saying, Ask for me, behold,
my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations. Neither shall thy
name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham, for a father of many nations
have I made thee. And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations out thee,
and kings shall come out of thee. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee
and thy seed after thee and their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,
the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession,
and I will be their God. And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou and thy seed after thee, in their generations. This is my covenant, which ye shall keep between
me and you and thy seed after thee. Every man-child among you shall be circumcised,
and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the covenant
betwixt me and you. And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every
man-child in your generations, he that is born in the house or bought with money of
any stranger which is not of thy seed. He that is born in thy house and he that is bought
with thy money must needs be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your flesh for
an everlasting covenant. And the uncircumcised man-child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he hath broken my covenant.
And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai,
but Sarah shall her name be. And I will bless her and give thee a son also of her, yea I
will bless her and she shall be a mother of nations, kings of people shall be of her.
Then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born
unto him that is an hundred years old, and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear?
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee. And God said, Sarah
thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him. And
as for Ishmael, I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him and will make him fruitful
and will multiply him exceedingly, twelve princes shall he beget, and that will make
a great nation. But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee
at this set time in the next year. And he left off talking with him, and God went up
from Abraham. And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house,
and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house, and
circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the self-same day as God had said unto him.
And Abraham was ninety years old and nine when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin. And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh
of his foreskin. In the self-same day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
And all the men of his house, born in the house and bought with money of the stranger,
were circumcised with him.
And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains
of Mamrie, and he sat in the tent-door in the heat of the day, and he lift up his eyes
and looked, and lo, three men stood by him. And when he saw them, he ran to meet them
from the tent-door, and bowed himself toward the ground, and said,
My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy
servant. Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves
under the tree, and I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts. After
that ye shall pass on, for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said,
So do as thou hast said.
And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures
of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth. And Abraham ran unto the herd,
and fetched a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man, and he hasted to dress
it. And he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them,
and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat. And they said unto him, Where is
Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold in the tent. And he said, I will certainly return
unto thee according to the time of life, and lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah
heard it in the tent-door which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age, and it ceased to be with Sarah after
the manner of women. Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old
shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also? And the lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore
did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child which am old? Is anything too
hard for the lord? At the time appointed I will return unto thee according to the time
of life, and Sarah shall have a son.
Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not, for she was afraid. And he said, Nay, but
thou didst laugh.
And the men rose up from thence, and looked towards Sodom, and Abraham went with them
to bring them on the way. And the lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which
I do, seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him? For I know him that he will command his children
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the lord to do justice and
judgment, that the lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
And the lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin
is very grievous, I will go down now, and see what they have done altogether according
to the cry of it which has come unto me, and if not, I will know.
And the men turned their faces from thence, and went towards Sodom, but Abraham stood
yet before the lord. And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous
with the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city. Wilt thou also
destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? That be far from
this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as
the wicked, that be far from thee, shall not the judge of all the earth do right?
And the lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare
all the place for their sakes. And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes. Peradventure there shall
be lack five of the fifty righteous. Wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five?
And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it. And he spake unto him
yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will
not do it for forty's sake. And he said unto him, O, let not the lord be angry, and I will
speak. Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it
if I find thirty there. And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
lord. Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it
for twenty's sake. And he said, O, let not the lord be angry, and I will speak yet but
this once. Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it
for ten's sake. And the lord went his way as soon as he had left communing with Abraham,
and Abraham returned unto his place.
And there came two angels to Sodom at even, and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom, and Lot,
seeing them, rose up to meet them, and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground,
and he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and
tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways.
And they said, Nay, but we will abide in the street all night.
And he pressed upon them greatly, and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house,
and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house
round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter, and they called unto Lot
and said unto him, Where are the men which came into thee this night?
Bring them out unto us, that we may know them.
And Lot went out the door unto them, and shut the door after him, and said, I pray you,
brethren, do not so wickedly.
Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man.
Let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes,
only unto these men do nothing, for therefore came they unto the shadow of my roof.
And they said, Stand back.
And they said again, This one fellow came into Sojourn, and he will needs be a judge.
Now will we deal worse with thee than with them.
And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.
But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut, too,
the door.
And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and
great, so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides?
Sons-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring
them out of this place.
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is wax and great, before the face
of the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons-in-law, which married his daughters, and said, Up,
get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy the city.
But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons-in-law.
And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife
which are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and
upon the hand of his two daughters, the Lord being merciful unto him, and they brought
him forth, and set him without the city.
And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for
Look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain.
Escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my lord.
Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy,
which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life, and I cannot escape to the mountain,
lest some evil take me, and I die.
Behold thou, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one.
Oh, let me escape thither, is it not a little one, and my soul shall live.
And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will
not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.
Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do anything till thou become thither.
Therefore the name of the city was called Zohar.
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zohar.
Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven,
and he overthrew those cities and all the plain and all the inhabitants of the cities
and that which grew upon the ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
And Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord,
and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah and toward all the land of the plain,
and beheld and lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham
and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.
And Lot went up out of Zohar and dwelt in the mountain and his two daughters with him,
for he feared to dwell in Zohar, and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the
earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth.
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve
seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night, and the firstborn went in and lay with
her father, and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
And it came to pass on the morrow that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I
lay yesternight with my father, let us make him drink wine this night also, and go thou
in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night also, and the younger arose and lay
with him, and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab, the same as the father of the Moabites
unto this day.
And the younger she also bare a son, and called his name Benamai, the same as the father of
the children of Ammon unto this day.
An Abraham journeyed from thence toward the
south country, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Girar.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister, and Abimelek king of Girar sent,
and took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelek in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold thou art but a dead
man, for the woman which thou hast taken, for she is a man's wife.
But Abimelek had not come near her, and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous
nation?
Said he not unto me, She is my sister, and she, even she herself, said, He is my brother.
In the integrity of my heart, in the innocency of my hands, have I done this.
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy
heart, for I also withheld thee from sinning against me.
Therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.
Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee,
and thou shalt live.
And if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou and all that are
thine.
Therefore Abimelek rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all
these things in their ears, and the men were sore afraid.
Then Abimelek called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us?
And what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
Thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
And Abimelek said unto Abraham, What sawest thou that thou hast done this thing?
And Abraham said, Because I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place, and
they will slay me for my wife's sake.
And yet indeed she is my sister, she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter
of my mother, and she became my wife.
And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said
unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt show unto me, and every place whither
we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
And Abimelek took sheep, and oxen, and men's servants, and women's servants, and gave them
unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.
And Abimelek said, Behold, my land is before thee, dwell where it pleaseth thee.
And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver, behold,
he is to thee a covering of the eyes unto all that are with thee and with all other.
Thus she was reproved.
So Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelek, and his wife, and his maid-servants,
and they bear children.
For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelek because of Sarah,
Abraham's wife.
And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
For Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God
had spoken to him.
And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him,
Isaac.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.
And Abraham was an hundred years old when his son Isaac was born unto him.
And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.
And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham that Sarah should have given children suck,
for I have borne him a son in his old age?
And the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac
was weaned.
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, which she had borne unto Abraham, mocking.
Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son, for the son of
this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.
And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad and because
of thy bondwoman, in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice.
For in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning and took bread and a bottle of water and gave
it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away.
And she departed and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
And she went and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow-shot,
for she said, Let me not see the death of the child.
And she sat over against him and lifted up her voice and wept.
And God heard the voice of the lad, and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven
and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar?
Fear not, for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand, for I will make him a great nation.
And God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the bottle
with water and gave the lad drink.
And God was with the lad, and he grew and dwelt in the wilderness and became an archer.
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Peran, and his mother took him a wife out of the land
of Egypt.
And it came to pass at that time that Abimlek and Phicol, the chief captain of his host,
spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest.
Thou therefore swear unto me hereby God, that thou will not deal falsely with me, nor with
my son, nor with my son's son, but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
And Abraham said, I will swear.
And Abraham reproved Abimlek because of a well of water which Abimlek's servants had
violently taken away.
And Abimlek said, I want not who hath done this thing, neither didst thou tell me, neither
yet heard I of it, but to-day.
And Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them unto Abimlek, and both of them made a covenant.
And Abraham set seven eulams of the flock by themselves.
And Abimlek said unto Abraham, What mean these seven eulams which thou hast set by themselves?
And he said, For these seven eulams shalt thou take of my hand that they may be a witness
unto me that I have digged this well.
Wherefore he called that place Beersheba, because there they swear both of them.
Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba, then Abimlek rose up, and Phicol the chief captain
of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.
And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord the
everlasting God.
And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines land many days.
And it came to pass after these things that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him Abraham,
And he said, Behold, here I am.
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee
into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains
which I will tell thee of.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young
men with him, and Isaac his son, and claved the wood for the burnt offering, and rose
up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.
Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass, and I and the lad will
go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son, and he took
the fire in his hand and a knife, and they went both of them together.
And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father, and he said, Here am I, my
son.
And he said, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.
So they went both of them together.
And they came to the place which God had told him of, and Abraham built an altar there,
and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the
wood.
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.
And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham!
And he said, Here am I.
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him, for now
I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son,
from me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold, behind him a ram caught in a thicket
by his horns.
And Abraham went, and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering, in the stead
of his son.
And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah Jireh, as it is said to this day,
In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.
And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time, and said, By
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld
thy son, thine only son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the seashore,
and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice.
So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba,
and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
And it came to pass, after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milka,
she hath also borne children unto thy brother Nahor, whose his first-born, and Boz his brother,
and Chemuel the father of Aram, and Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaf, and Bethuel.
And Bethuel begat Rebekah. These eight Milka did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
And his concubine, whose name was Ruma, she bore also Tiba, and Gaham, and Thehash, and
Meika.
And Sarah was one hundred and seven and twenty years old. These were the years of the life
of Sarah.
And Sarah died in Kirjath Arba, the same as Hebron in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came
to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying, I
am a stranger and a sojourner with you. Give me a possession of a burying place with you,
that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, Hear us, my lord, thou art
a mighty prince among us. In the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead. None of us shall
withhold from thee his sepulcher, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
And Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children
of Heth. And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead
out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me, to Ephraim the son of Zohar, that he may
give me the cave of Machpila, which he hath, which is in the end of his field. For as much
money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a burying place amongst you.
And Ephraim dwelt among the children of Heth, and Ephraim the Hittite answered Abraham in
the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city,
saying, Nay, my lord, hear me. The field give I thee, and the cave that is therein I give
thee, in the presence of the sons of my people give I thee, bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land, and he spake unto Ephraim
in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee,
hear me, I will give thee money for the field, take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.
And Ephraim answered Abraham, saying unto him, My lord, hearken unto me. The land is
worth four hundred shekels of silver. What is that betwixt me and thee? Bury therefore
thy dead.
And Abraham hearkened unto Ephraim, and Abraham weighed to Ephraim the silver which he had
named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money
with the merchant.
And the field of Ephraim, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamrie, the field and the
cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the
borders round about, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
of Heth before all that went in at the gate of his city.
And after this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah, before
Mamrie, the same as Hebron in the land of Canaan. And the field and the cave that is
therein were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sons
of Heth.
And Abraham was old and well stricken in age, and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had,
Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and I will make thee swear by the LORD, the
God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of
the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell, but thou shalt go unto my country,
and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me
unto this land, must I need to bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest.
And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.
The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my
kindred, and which spake unto me, and that swear unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will
I give this land, he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto
my son from thence.
And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my
oath, only bring not my son thither again.
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sweared to him
concerning that matter.
And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed, for all the goods
of his master were in his hand, and he arose and went to Mesopotamia unto the city of Nahor.
And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of
the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.
And he said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day,
and show kindness unto my master Abraham.
Behold I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come
out to draw water.
And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I
pray thee, that I may drink.
And she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also.
Let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac, and thereby shall
I know that thou hast showed kindness unto my master.
And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that behold Rebecca came out, who was born
of Milka, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her.
And she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water
of thy pitcher.
And she said, Drink, my lord.
And she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also,
until they have done drinking.
And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to
draw water, and drew for all his camels.
And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the lord had made his journey
prosperous or not.
And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring
of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,
and said, Whose daughter art thou?
Tell me, I pray thee, is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milka, which she bear
unto Nahor.
She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.
And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the lord.
And he said, Blessed be the lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute
my master of his mercy and his truth, I being in the way, the lord led me to the house of
my master's brethren.
And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.
And Rebecca had a brother, and his name was Laban, and Laban ran out unto the man, unto
the well.
And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and
he heard the words of Rebecca his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me, that he
came unto the man, and behold he stood by the camels at the well.
And he said, Come in thou blessed of the lord, wherefore standest thou without?
For I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.
And the man came into the house, and he unguarded his camels, and gave straw and provender for
the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.
And there was set meat before him to eat, but he said, I will not eat until I have told
mine errand.
And he said, Speak on.
And he said, I am Abraham's servant, and the lord hath blessed my master greatly, and he
is become great, and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and men's
servants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.
And Sarah, my master's wife, bare a son to my master, when she was old, and unto him
hath he given all that he hath.
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters
of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell, but thou shalt go unto my father's house,
and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.
And I said unto my master, Peradventure, the woman will not follow me.
And he said unto me, The lord before whom I walk will send his angel with thee, and
prosper thy way, and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's
house.
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred, and if they
give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.
And I came this day unto the well, and said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now thou
do prosper my way which I go, behold, I stand by the well of water, and it shall come to
pass that when the Virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray
thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink, and she say to me, Both drink thou, and I
will also draw for thy camels, let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed
out for my master's son.
And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebecca came forth with her pitcher
on her shoulder, and she went down unto the well, and drew water, and I said unto her,
Let me drink, I pray thee, and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also.
So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou?
And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milka bear unto him, and I put the
earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.
And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master
Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto
his son.
And now, if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me, and if not, tell
me, that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
Then Laban and Bethuel answered, and said, The thing proceedeth from the Lord, we cannot
speak unto thee bad or good.
Behold Rebecca is before thee, take her and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife,
as the Lord hath spoken.
And it came to pass that when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the Lord
bowing himself to the earth.
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver and jewels of gold and raiment, and gave them
to Rebecca, and he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.
And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night.
And they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least
ten, after that she shall go.
And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way, send me away
that I may go to my master.
And they said, We will call the damsel and inquire at her mouth.
And they called Rebecca, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man?
And she said, I will go.
And they sent away Rebecca, their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and
his men.
And they blessed Rebecca, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of
thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
And Rebecca arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man,
and the servant took Rebecca, and went his way.
And Isaac came from the way of the well Lehi Roy, for he dwelt in the south country.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the even tide, and he lifted up his eyes,
and saw, and behold, the camels were coming.
And Rebecca lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac she lighted off the camel.
For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet
us?
And the servant had said, It is my master, therefore she took a veil and covered herself.
And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebecca, and she became his
wife, and he loved her, and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshin, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shua.
And Jokshin begat Sheba, and Dedan.
And the sons of Dedan were Ashurim, and Latushim, and Leumim.
And the sons of Midian, Ephah, and Ephur, and Hanak, and Abida, and Eldayah.
All these were the children of Keturah.
And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent
them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
And these were the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, and a hundred threescore,
and fifteen years.
Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years,
and was gathered to his people.
And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of
Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre, the field which Abraham purchased
unto the sons of Heth.
There was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.
And it came to pass, after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac, and Isaac
dwelt by the well Lehi Roy.
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's
handmaid, bare unto Abraham.
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations,
the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebejeth, and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsum, and Mishma, and Duma,
and Massa, Hader, and Tima, Jeter, Nefesh, and Kedema.
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles, twelve princes according to their nations.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, and a hundred and thirty and seven years,
and he gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people.
And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is, before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria,
and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son.
Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter
of Bethuel, the Syrian, of Paedon Aram, the sister to Laban, the Syrian.
And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren, and the Lord was entreated
of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
And the children struggled together within her, and she said, If it be so, why am I thus?
And she went to inquire of the Lord.
And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall
be separated from thy bowels, and the one people shall be stronger than the other people,
and the elder shall serve the younger.
And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment, and they called his name
Esau.
And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel, and his name
was called Jacob, and Isaac was three score years old when she bare them.
And the boys grew, and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field, and Jacob was
a plain man, dwelling in tents.
And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison, but Rebekah loved Jacob.
And Jacob sawed pottage, and Esau came from the field, and he was faint, and Esau said
to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage, for I am faint. Therefore
his name was called Edom.
And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright
do to me?
And Jacob said, Swear to me this day.
And he swear unto him, and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils, and he did eat and drink, and rose
up and went his way. Thus Esau despised his birthright.
And there was a famine in the land beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham,
and Isaac went unto Abimelek, king of the Philistines, unto Gerar. And the Lord appeared
unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt, dwell in the land which I shall tell thee
of. Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee. For unto thee,
and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I swear
unto Abraham thy father. And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and
will give unto thy seed all these countries. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed, because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments,
my statutes, and my laws.
And Isaac dwelt in Gerar, and the men of the place asked him of his wife, and he said,
She is my sister, for he feared to say, She is my wife, lest, said he, the men of the
place should kill me for Rebekah, because she was fair to look upon. And it came to
he had been there a long time, that Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looked out at a window,
and saw, and behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife. And Abimelech called Isaac,
and said, Behold, of assurity, she is thy wife, and how saidst thou, She is my sister?
And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, lest I die for her. And Abimelech said, What is
this thou hast done unto us? One of the people might lightly have lied with thy wife, and
thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us. And Abimelech charged all his people,
saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death. Then Isaac sowed
in that land, and received in the same year and hundredfold, and the Lord blessed him.
And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great, for he
had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants, and
the Philistines envied him. For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in
the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.
And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us, for thou art much mightier than we. And Isaac
departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Girhar, and dwelt there.
And Isaac digged again the wells of water which they had digged in the days of Abraham
his father, for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham, and he called
their names after the names by which his father had called them. And Isaac's servants digged
in the valley, and found there a well of springing water. And the herdmen of Girhar did strive
with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours. And he called the name of the well Esek,
because they strove with him. And they digged another well, and strove for that also, and
he called the name of it Sitna. And he removed from thence, and digged another well, and
for that they strove not. And he called the name of it Rehoboth, and he said, For now
the Lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land. And he went up from
thence to Beersheba. And the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the
God of Abraham, thy father. Fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply
thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake. And he built an altar there, and called upon the
name of the Lord, and pitched his tent there, and there Isaac's servants digged a well.
Then Abimlek went to him from Girhar, and Ahazeth, one of his friends, and Phicol, the
captain of his army. And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me,
and have sent me away from you? And they said, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee,
and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us
make a covenant with thee, that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee,
and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace. Thou
art now the blessed of the Lord. And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
And they rose up at times in the morning, and swear one to another, and Isaac sent them
away, and they departed from him in peace. And it came to pass the same day that Isaac's
servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto
him, We have found water. And he called it Sheba, therefore the name of the city is Beersheba
unto this day. And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of
Berei the Hittite, and Bashameth the daughter of Elan the Hittite, which were a grief of
mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
And it came to pass that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not
he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son, and he said unto him, Behold,
here am I. And he said, Behold now, I am old, and I know not the day of my death. Now therefore
take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver, and thy bow, and go out to the field, and
take me some venison, and make me savoury meat such as I love, and bring it to me that
I may eat, that my soul may bless thee before I die.
And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son, and Esau went to the field to hunt
for venison, and to bring it.
And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau
thy brother, saying, Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat that I may eat, and bless
thee before the Lord before my death. Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according
to that which I command thee. Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids
of the goats, and I will make them savoury meat for thy father such as he loveth, and
thou shalt bring it to thy father that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before
his death.
And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a
smooth man. My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver,
and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son, only obey my voice, and go
fetch me them.
And he went and fetched and brought them to his mother, and his mother made savoury meat
such as his father loved. And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob, her younger son. And she put the skins
of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck, and she gave
the savoury meat and the bread which she had prepared into the hand of her son Jacob.
And he came unto his father and said, My father, and he said, Here am I, who art thou my son?
And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first born, I have done according as thou
batest me, arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And
he said, Because the Lord thy God brought it to me.
And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether
thou be my very son Esau or not. And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father, and he felt
him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. And
he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy as his brother Esau's hands, so he
blessed him. And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am. And he said,
Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee.
And he brought it near to him, and he did eat, and he brought him wine, and he drank.
And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son. And he came near
and kissed him, and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See,
the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed. Therefore God
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine.
Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee. Be Lord over thy brethren, and let
thy mother's sons bow down to thee. Cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed
be he that blesseth thee.
And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was
yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came
in from his hunting. And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father,
and said unto his father, Let my father arise and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul
may bless me. And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son,
thy firstborn Esau. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? Where is he that
hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and
have blessed him? Yea, and he shall be blessed. And when Esau heard the words of his father,
he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even
me also, O my father. And he said, Thy brother came with subtlety, and hath taken away thy
blessing. And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? For he hath supplanted me these two
times. He took away my birthright, and behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he
said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me? And Isaac answered and said unto Esau,
Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants,
and with corn and wine have I sustained him. And what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me
also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice and wept. And Isaac his father answered
and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth and of the dew
of heaven from above, and by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother, and
it shall come to pass, when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke
from off thy neck. And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed
him. And Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand. Then
I will slay my brother Jacob. And these words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebecca,
and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother
Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee. Now therefore, my
son, obey my voice, and arise, flee thou to Laban, my brother, to Heron, and tarry with
him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away, until thy brother's anger turn
away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him. Then I will send and fetch
thee from thence. Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?
And Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If
Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of
land, what good shall my life do me?
An Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Arise, go to Paedon Aram, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take thee
a wife from thence, of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother.
And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest
of people, and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
And Isaac sent away Jacob, and he went to Paedon Aram, unto Laban, son of Bethuel the
Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Paedon Aram, to take
him a wife from thence, and that as he blessed him, he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan, and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother,
and was gone to Paedon Aram.
And Esau, seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father, then went Esau
unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had, Maeleth the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's
son, the sister of Nebajeth, to be his wife.
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran, and he lighted upon a certain
place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set, and he took of the stones
of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to
heaven, and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
And behold the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and
the God of Isaac, the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed, and
thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west,
and to the east, and to the north, and to the south, and in thee and in thy seed shall
all the families of the earth be blessed.
And behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will
bring thee again into this land, for I will not leave thee until I have done that which
I have spoken of to thee.
And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and
I knew it not.
And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place!
This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows,
and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethel, but the name of that city was called Loz at
the first.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that
I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to
my father's house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God.
And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house, and of all that thou
shalt give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee.
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.
And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and lo, there were three flocks of sheep
lying by it, for out of that well they watered the flocks, and a great stone was upon the
well's mouth.
And thither were all the flocks gathered, and they rolled the stone from the well's
mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place.
And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye?
And they said, Of Heron are we.
And he said unto them, Know ye Laban, the son of Nahor?
And they said, We know him.
And he said unto them, Is he well?
And they said, He is well, and behold, Rachel, his daughter, cometh with the sheep.
And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered
together.
Water ye the sheep, and go, and feed them.
And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, until they roll the
stone from the well's mouth, then we water the sheep.
And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she kept them.
And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother,
and the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone
from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban, his mother's brother.
And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son.
And she ran, and told her father.
And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob, his sister's son, that he
ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house.
And he told Laban all these things.
And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh.
And he abode with him the space of a month.
And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve
me for naught, tell me, what shall thy wages be?
And Laban had two daughters.
The name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah was tender-eyed, but Rachel was beautiful and well-favoured.
And Jacob loved Rachel, and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel, thy younger daughter.
And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another
man.
Abide with me.
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a few days for the
love he had to her.
And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in
unto her.
And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
And it came to pass in the evening that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to
him, and he went in unto her.
And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an handmaid.
And it came to pass that in the morning, behold, it was Leah.
And he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me?
Did not I serve with thee for Rachel?
Wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the
first born.
Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also, for the service which thou shalt serve
with me yet seven other years.
And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week, and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife
also.
And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah, his handmaid, to be her maid.
And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with
him yet seven other years.
And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb, but Rachel was barren.
And Leah conceived, and bear a son, and she called his name Reuben, for she said, Surely
the Lord hath looked upon my affliction, now therefore my husband will love me.
And she conceived again, and bear a son, and said, Because the Lord hath heard that I was
hated, he hath therefore given me this son also.
And she called his name Simeon.
And she conceived again, and bear a son, and said, Now this time will my husband be joined
unto me, because I have borne him three sons.
Therefore was his name called Levi.
And she conceived again, and bear a son, and she said, Now will I praise the Lord.
Therefore she called his name Judah, and left Baring.
And when Rachel saw that she bear Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister, and said
unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath
withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
And she said, Behold my maid Bilha.
Go in unto her, and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.
And she gave him Bilha her handmaid to wife, and Jacob went in unto her.
And Bilha conceived, and bear Jacob a son.
And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son.
Therefore she called his name Dan.
And Bilha, Rachel's maid, conceived again, and bear Jacob a second son.
And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed.
And she called his name Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had left Baring, she took Zilpah, her maid, and gave her Jacob
to wife.
And Zilpah Leah's maid, bear Jacob a son.
And Leah said, A troop cometh.
And she called his name Gad.
And Zilpah Leah's maid, bear Jacob a second son.
And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed.
And she called his name Asher.
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought
them unto his mother Leah.
Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband, and wouldest
thou take away my son's mandrakes also?
And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to-night for thy son's mandrakes.
And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou
must come in unto me, for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes.
And he lay with her that night.
And God harkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bear Jacob the fifth son.
And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband.
And she called his name Issachar.
And Leah conceived again, and bear Jacob the sixth son.
And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry, now will my husband dwell with me,
because I have borne him six sons.
And she called his name Zebulun.
And afterwards she bear a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
And God remembered Rachel, and God harkened to her, and opened her womb.
And she conceived, and bear a son, and said, God hath taken away my reproach.
And she called his name Joseph, and said, The Lord shall add to me another son.
And it came to pass, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban,
Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go,
for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.
And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes,
tarry, for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me.
For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude,
and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming, and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?
And he said, What shall I give thee?
And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me anything.
If thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock.
I will pass through all thy flock to-day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle,
and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats,
and of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face.
Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep,
that shall be counted stolen with me.
And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.
And he removed that day the he-goats that were ring-straked and spotted,
and all the she-goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it,
and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob, and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
And Jacob took him rods of green poplar and of the hazel and chestnut tree,
and piled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
And he set the rods which he had piled before the flocks and the gutters and the watering-troughs
when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ring-straked, speckled, and spotted.
And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ring-straked
and all the brown in the flock of Laban, and he put his own flocks by themselves,
and put them not on to Laban's cattle.
And it came to pass, when soever the stronger cattle did conceive,
that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle and the gutters,
that they might conceive among the rods.
But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in, so the feebler were Laban's,
and the stronger Jacob's.
And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle and maid-servants,
and men-servants, and camels, and asses.
And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying,
Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's,
and of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before.
And the LORD said unto Jacob,
Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee.
And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
and said unto them, I see your father's countenance,
that it is not toward me as before, but the God of my father hath been with me.
And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times,
but God suffered him not to hurt me.
If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages,
then all the cattle bear speckled.
And if he said thus, The ring-straked shall be thy hire,
then bear all the cattle ring-straked.
Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived,
that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream,
and behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle
were ring-straked, speckled, and grizzled.
And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob, and I said,
Here am I.
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see all the rams
which leap upon the cattle are ring-straked, speckled, and grizzled,
for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointed'st the pillar,
and where thou vowed'st to vow unto me.
Now arise, get thee out from this land,
and return unto the land of thy kindred.
And Rachel and Lee answered, and said unto him,
Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Are we not counted of him strangers?
For he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money.
For all the riches which God hath taken from our father,
that is ours, and our children's.
Now then, whatsoever God had said unto thee, Do.
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels,
and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten,
the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in pagan Aram,
for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
And Laban went to shear his sheep, and Rachel had stolen the images
that were her father's.
And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian,
in that he told him not that he fled.
So he fled with all that he had, and he rose up,
and passed over the river, and set his face toward the Mount Gilead.
And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey,
and they overtook him in the Mount Gilead.
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him,
Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob, either good or bad.
Then Laban overtook Jacob.
Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount,
and Laban with his brethren pitched in the Mount of Gilead.
And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away
unawares to me, and carried away my daughters,
as captives taken with the sword?
Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me,
and didst not tell me that I might have sent thee away with mirth,
and with songs, with tabret, and with harp,
and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
Thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt.
But the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying,
Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob, either good or bad.
And now, though thou wouldst needs be gone, because thou soar longest
after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid, for I said,
Peradventure thou wouldst take by force thy daughters from me.
With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live,
before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee.
For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.
And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and
into the two maidservants' tents, but he found them not.
Then went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture,
and sat upon them.
And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.
And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot
rise up before thee, for the custom of women is upon me.
And he searched, but found not the images.
And Jacob was wroth, and showed with Laban.
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass?
What is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy
household stuff, said it here before my brethren and thy brethren,
that they may judge betwixt us both.
This twenty years have I been with thee, thy yews and thy she-goats
have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee, I bear the loss
of it, of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day or stolen
by night.
Thus I was, in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night,
and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
Thus have I been twenty years in thy house, I served thee fourteen
years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle, and thou hast
changed my wages ten times.
Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac
had been with me, surely thou had sent me away now empty.
God had seen mine affliction and the labor of my hands, and rebuked
thee yester-night.
And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters,
and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and
all that thou seest is mine, and what can I do this day unto these my
daughters, or unto their children which they have borne?
Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou, and let
it be for a witness between me and thee.
And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones, and they took stones,
and made a heap, and they did eat there upon the heap.
And Laban called it G-gar-say-a-dutha, but Jacob called it Gaelid.
And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day.
Therefore was the name of it called Gaelid, and Mizpah, for he said,
The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.
If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives
beside my daughters, no man is with us.
See, God is witness betwixt me and thee.
And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar which
I have cast betwixt me and thee.
This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass
over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and
this pillar unto me for harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father,
judge betwixt us.
And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac.
Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren
to eat bread.
And they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.
And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his
daughters, and blessed them.
And Laban departed, and returned unto his place.
www.logoslibrary.org.
And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw them,
he said, This is God's host, and he called the name of that place Mayoneum. And Jacob
sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau. Thy servant Jacob
saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now. And I have oxen and
asses, flocks, and men's servants, and women's servants. And I have sent to tell my lord
that I may find grace in thy sight. And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came
to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee and four hundred men with him. Then
the people that was with him, and the flocks and herds, and the camels, into two bands.
And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which
is left shall escape. And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and
with thee. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all the truth which
thou hast shewed unto thy servant, for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now
I am become two bands. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of Esau, for I fear him lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the
children. And thou saidest, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand
of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude. And he lodged there that same night, and took
of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his brother. Two hundred she-goats, and
twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams, thirty milk-camels with their colts,
forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she-asses, and ten foals. And he delivered them into
the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves, and said unto his servants, Pass over before
me, and put a space betwixt drove and grove. And he commanded the foremost, saying, When
Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whos art thou, and whither goest thou,
and whos are these before thee? Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's, it
is a present sent unto my lord Esau, and behold also he is behind us. And so commanded he
the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye
speak unto Esau when ye find him. And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is
behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and
afterward I will see his face. Peradventure he will accept of me. So went the present
over before him, and himself lodged that night in the company. And he rose up that night,
and took his two wives, and his two women's servants, and his eleven sons, and passed
over the ford Jabbok. And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that
he had. And Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking
of the day. And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of
his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint as he wrestled with him.
And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except
me. And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob. And he said, Thy name
shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel, for as a prince hast thou power with God and
with men, and hast prevailed. And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name.
And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.
And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, for I have seen God face to face, and my life
is preserved. And as he passed over Penuel, the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon
his thigh. Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is
upon the hollow of the thigh unto this day, because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh
in the sinew that shrank.
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold Esau came, and with him four hundred
men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.
Then he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after,
and Rachel and Joseph hindermost. And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the
ground seven times, until he came near to his brother. And Esau ran to meet him, and
embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him, and they wept. And he lifted up his eyes,
and saw the women and the children, and said, Who are those with thee? and he said, The
children which God hath graciously given that I servant. Then the handmaids came near, they
and their children, and they bowed themselves. And Leah also with her children came near,
and bowed themselves, and after came Joseph near, and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? and he said, These are
find grace in the sight of my Lord. And Esau said, I have enough, my brother, keep that
thou hast unto thyself. And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my hand, for therefore I have seen thy face as though
I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me. Take, I pray thee, my blessing
that is brought to thee, because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have
enough. And he urged him, and he took it. And he said, Let us take our journey, and
let us go, and I will go before thee. And he said unto him, My Lord knoweth that the
children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me, and if men should
overdrive them one day, all the flock will die. Let my Lord, I pray thee, pass over before
his servant, and I will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me, and the
children be able to endure, until I come unto my Lord, unto Seir. And Esau said, Let me
now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What needeth it,
let me find grace in the sight of my Lord. So Esau returned that day on his way unto
Seir. And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him in house, and made boots for his
cattle. Therefore the name of the place is called Succoth. And Jacob came to Shalem,
a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Payton Aram, and
pitched his tent before the city. And he bought a parcel of a field where he had spread his
tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred pieces of
money. And he erected there an altar, and called it El Elohi Israel.
And Dinah, the daughter of Leah, which she
bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land. And when Shechem, the son of
Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled
her. And his soul clave unto Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake
kindly unto the damsel. And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this
damsel to wife. And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah, his daughter, that his sons
were with his cattle in the field, and Jacob held his peace until they were come. And Hamor,
the father of Shechem, went out unto Jacob to commune with him. And the sons of Jacob
came out of the field when they heard it, and the men were grieved, and they were very
wroth because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter, which thing
ought not to be done. And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth
for your daughter. I pray you give her him to wife. And make ye marriages with us, and
give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you. And ye shall dwell with
us, and the land shall be before you. Dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions
therein. And Shechem said unto her father, and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in
your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me, I will give. Ask me never so much dowry and
gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me. But give me the damsel to wife.
And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, Because
he had defiled Dinah their sister. And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing to
give our sister to one that is uncircumcised, for that were a reproach unto us. But in this
will we consent unto you, if ye will be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised.
Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and
we will dwell with you, and we will become one people. But if ye will not hearken unto
us to be circumcised, then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone. And their words
pleased Hamor and Shechem Hamor's son. And the young man deferred not to do the thing,
because he had delight in Jacob's daughter, and he was more honorable than all the house
of his father. And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed
with the men of their city, saying, These men are peaceable with us, therefore let them
dwell in the land and trade therein. For the land, behold, it is large enough for them.
Let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters. Only herein
will the men consent unto us, for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among
us be circumcised as they are circumcised. Shall not their cattle and their substance
and every beast of theirs be ours? Only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell
with us. And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate
of his city, and every male was circumcised all that went out of the gate of his city.
And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob,
Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly,
and slew all the males. And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword,
and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out. The sons of Jacob came upon the
slain and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister. They took their sheep,
and their oxen, and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was
in the field, and all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they
captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi,
E have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites
and the Perizzites, and I, being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against
me and slay me, and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
And they said,
Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
And God said unto Jacob,
Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar unto God, that appeared
unto thee when thou fledtest from the face of Esau thy brother.
Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him,
Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments. And
go up to Bethel, and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day
of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.
And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all their earrings
which were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
And they journeyed, and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about
them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel, he and all the
people that were with him. And he built there an altar, and called the place El-Bethel,
because there God appeared unto him when he fled from the face of his brother.
But Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak, and
the name of it was called El-Anbaikoth.
And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Paedon Aram, and blessed him.
And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob, thy name shall not be called any more Jacob,
but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel.
And God said unto him, I am God Almighty, be fruitful and multiply, a nation and a company
of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins. And the land which
I give Abraham and Isaac to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give
the land.
And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone,
and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon. And Jacob called the
name of the place where God spake with him Bethel.
And they journeyed from Bethel, and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath, and
Rachel travailed, and she had hard labor. And it came to pass, when she was in hard
labor, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not, thou shalt have this son also. And it
came to pass, as her soul was in departing, for she died, that she called his name Ben-Onai,
but his father called him Benjamin. And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath,
which is Bethlehem. And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave, that is the pillar of Rachel's
grave unto this day.
And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar. And it came to pass,
when Israel dwelt in that land that Reuben went, and lay with Bilha his father's concubine,
and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve. The sons of Leah, Reuben, Jacob's
first born, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun. The sons of Rachel,
Joseph, and Benjamin. And the sons of Bilha, Rachel's handmaid, Dan, and Naphtali. And
the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, Gad, and Asher. These were the sons of Jacob, which
were born to him, and paid in Aram. And Jacob came unto Isaac his father, unto Mamre, unto
the city of Arba, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned. And the days of Isaac
were a hundred and four score years. And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered
unto his people, being old and full of days. And his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.
Now these are the generations of Esau, who
is Edom. Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan, Adah the daughter of Elan the Hittite,
and Ahol Abbaamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibion the Hivite, and Bashamath
Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebejath. And Adah bare to Esau a life-faz, and Bashamath
bare rule. And Ahol Abbaamah, Berjish, and Jalim, and Korah, these were the sons of Esau,
which were born unto him in the land of Canaan. And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and
his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts,
and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan, and went into the country
from the face of his brother Jacob. For their riches were more than that they might dwell
together, and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
Thus Esau dwelt in Mount Seir. Esau is Edom. And these are the generations of Esau, the
father of the Edomites in Mount Seir. These are the names of Esau's sons. Eliphaz, the
son of Edah, the wife of Esau, rule, the son of Bashamath, the wife of Esau. And the sons
of Eliphaz were Timon, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz. And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz,
Esau's son, and she bore to Eliphaz Amalek. These were the sons of Edah, Esau's wife.
And these were the sons of Rul, Nahath, and Zirah, Shammah, and Mizzah. These were the
sons of Bashamath, Esau's wife. And these were the sons of Ahalibamah, the daughter
of Ana, the daughter of Zibian, Esau's wife. And she bore to Esau, Jeash, and Jalem, and
Korah. These were the dukes of the sons of Esau, the sons of Eliphaz, the firstborn son
of Esau, duke Timon, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz, duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke
Amalek. These are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These were the sons of
Edah. And these were the sons of Rul, Esau's son, duke Nahath, duke Zirah, duke Shammah,
duke Mizzah. These were the dukes that came of Rul in the land of Edom. These were the
sons of Bashamath, Esau's wife. And these were the sons of Ahalibamah, Esau's wife,
duke Jeash, duke Jalem, duke Korah. These were the dukes that came of Ahalibamah, the
sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.
These are the sons of Seir, the Horite, who inhabited the land, Lotan and Shobol and Zibian
and Einah and Daishan and Ezer and Daishan. These are the dukes of the Horites, the children
of Seir in the land of Edom. And the children of Lotan were Horai and Hemam, and Lotan's
sister was Timna. And the children of Shobol were these, Alvin and Manahath and Ebel, Shifo
and Onam. And these were the children of Zibian, both Aja and Einah. This was that Einah that
found the mules in the wilderness as he fed the asses of Zibian his father. And the children
of Einah were these, Daishan and Ahalibamah, the daughter of Einah. And these were the
children of Daishan, Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Kiran. The children of Ezer are
these, Bilhan and Zayavan and Akan. The children of Daishan are these, Uz and Aaron. These
are the dukes that come of the Horites, duke Lotan, duke Shobol, duke Zibian, duke Einah,
duke Daishan, duke Ezer, duke Daishan. These are the dukes that come of Horai, among their
dukes in the land of Seir. And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before
there reigned any king over the children of Israel. And Bela, the son of Beor, reigned
in Edom, and the name of his city was Dinhabah. And Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zerah,
of Basra, reigned in his stead. And Jobab died, and Husham, the land of Timani, reigned
in his stead. And Husham died, and Hadad, the son of Beedad, who smote Midian in the
field of Moab, reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Avoth. And Hadad died,
and Samlah, of Masrika, reigned in his stead. And Samlah died, and Saul, of Rehoboth, by
the river, reigned in his stead. And Saul died, and Baal-Hanan, the son of Aqbor, reigned
in his stead. And Baal-Hanan, the son of Aqbor, died, and Hadar reigned in his stead. And
the name of his city was Peu, and his wife's name was Mehedabal, the daughter of Matred,
the daughter of Mizahab. And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau according
to their families after their places by their names. Duke Timnah, Duke Alva, Duke Jetheth,
Duke Aholibamah, Duke Elah, Duke Pinon, Duke Kienaz, Duke Timon, Duke Mibzar, Duke Magdiel,
Duke Irem. These be the dukes of Edom according to their habitations in the land of their
possession. He is Esau, the father of the Edomites.
LogosLibrary.org
And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger in the land of Canaan.
These are the generations of Jacob.
Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren, and the lad was with the sons of Bilha and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives, and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age, and he made him a coat of many colors.
And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.
And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren, and they hated him yet the more.
And he said unto them, Here, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed.
For behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright, and behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.
And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us, or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us?
And they hated him yet the more for his dreams and for his words.
And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more, and behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.
And he told it to his father and to his brethren, and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast dreamed?
Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
And his brethren envied him, but his father observed the saying.
And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem?
Come, and I will send thee unto them.
And he said to him, Here am I.
And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks, and bring me word again.
So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
And a certain man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the field.
And the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
And he said, I seek my brethren, tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.
And the man said, They are departed hence, for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan.
And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.
And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.
And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.
Come now, therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit.
And we will say some evil beast hath devoured him, and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands, and said, Let us not kill him.
And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood.
But cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him,
that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.
And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stripped Joseph out of his coat,
his coat of many colours that was on him, and they took him and cast him into a pit,
and the pit was empty, there was no water in it.
And they sat down to eat bread.
They lifted up their eyes, and looked, and behold, a company of Ishmaelites came from Gilead,
with their camels bearing spicery, and balm, and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother and conceal his blood?
Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him,
for he is our brother and our flesh.
And his brethren were content.
Then there passed by Midianites' merchantmen, and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit,
and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver,
and they brought Joseph into Egypt.
And Reuben returned unto the pit, and behold, Joseph was not in the pit, and he rent his clothes.
And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not, and I, whither shall I go?
And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of goats, and dipped the coat in the blood.
And they set the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father, and said,
This have we found, know now whether it be thy son's coat or no.
And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat, an evil beast hath devoured him,
Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.
And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted,
and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son, mourning.
Thus his father wept for him.
And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaohs, and captain of the guard.
And it came to pass at that time that Judah went down from his brethren,
and turned into a certain Adulamite, whose name was Hira.
And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shua,
and he took her, and went in unto her.
And she conceived, and bare a son, and he called his name Er.
And she conceived again, and bare a son, and she called his name Onan.
And she yet again conceived, and bare a son, and called his name Shelah.
And he was at Kizib, when she bare him.
And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.
And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord slew him.
And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.
And Onan knew that the seed should not be his, and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife,
that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.
And the thing which he did displeased the Lord, wherefore he slew him also.
Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow at thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown.
For he said, Lest per adventure he die also, as his brethren did.
And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
And in process of time the daughter of Shua, Judah's wife, died.
And Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheep-sherers to Timnath, he and his friend Hira the Adulamite.
And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law goeth up to Timnath to share his sheep.
And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her with a veil,
and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath.
For she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
When Judah saw her, he thought her to be in harlot, because she had covered her face.
And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee.
For he knew not that she was his daughter-in-law.
And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?
And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock.
And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?
And he said, What pledge shall I give thee?
And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand.
And he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.
And she arose, and went away, and laid by her veil from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adulamite to receive his pledge from the woman's hand, but he found her not.
Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot that was openly by the wayside?
And they said, There was no harlot in this place.
And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her.
And also the men of the place said that there was no harlot in this place.
And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed.
Behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.
And it came to pass about three months after that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar, thy daughter-in-law, hath played the harlot.
And also, behold, she is with child by whoredom.
And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, By the man whose these are, am I with child.
And she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff.
And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more righteous than I, because that I gave her not to Shelah my son.
And he knew her again no more.
And it came to pass in the time of her travail that, behold, twins were in her womb.
And it came to pass when she travailed that the one put out his hand, and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
And it came to pass as he drew back his hand that, behold, his brother came out, and she said, How hast thou broken forth this breach be upon thee?
Therefore his name was called Phares.
And afterward came out his brother that had the scarlet thread upon his hand, and his name was called Zarah.
And Joseph was brought down to Egypt, and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, and Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmaelites, which had brought him down thither.
And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man, and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
And his master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him, and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.
And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the LORD blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake, and the blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had in the house and in the field.
And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand, and he knew not aught he had save the bread which he did eat, and Joseph was a goodly person and well favored.
And it came to pass after these things that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph, and she said, Lie with me.
But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master watteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand.
There is none greater in this house than I. Neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife. How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
And it came to pass as she spake to Joseph day by day that he hearkened not unto her to lie by her or to be with her.
And it came to pass about this time that Joseph went into the house to do his business, and there was none of the men of the house there within.
And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me. And he left his garment in her hand, and fled and got him out.
And it came to pass when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth, that she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying,
See, he hath brought in a Hebrew unto us to mock us. He came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice.
And it came to pass when he heard that I lifted up my voice, and cried that he left his garment with me, and fled and got him out.
And she laid up his garment by her until his Lord came home.
And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant which thou hast brought unto us came in unto me to mock me.
And it came to pass as I lifted up my voice, and cried that he left his garment with me, and fled out.
And it came to pass when his master heard the words of his wife which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me, that his wrath was kindled.
And Joseph's master took him and put him into the prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound, and he was there in the prison.
But the Lord was with Joseph, and showed him mercy, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison, and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.
The keeper of the prison looked not to anything that was under his hand, because the Lord was with him, and that which he did, the Lord made it to prosper.
And it came to pass after these things that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.
And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them, and they continued a season in ward.
And they dreamed a dream, both of them, each man his dream, and one night, each man, according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison.
And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and behold, they were sad.
And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to-day?
And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it.
And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God, tell me them, I pray you.
And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me, and in the vine were three branches, and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth, and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes.
And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.
And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it. The three branches are three days. Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place, and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand after the former manner when thou wast his butler.
But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and behold, I had three white baskets on my head, and in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of baked meats for Pharaoh, and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof. The three baskets are three days. Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree, and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.
And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants, and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants. And he restored the chief butler under his butler-ship again, and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand, but he hanged the chief baker as Joseph had interpreted to them. Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forget him.
The fleshed kine did eat up the seven well-favored and fat kine, so Pharaoh awoke. And he slept and dreamed the second time, and behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good. And behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them. And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears, and Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream.
And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled, and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt and all the wise men thereof, and Pharaoh told them his dream, but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.
Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day. Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker. And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he. We dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.
And there was there with us a young man, in Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard, and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams, to each man according to his dream he did interpret. And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was. Me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon, and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it, and I have heard say of thee that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me. God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river, and behold, there came up out of the river seven kind, fat-fleshed and well-favored, and they fed in a meadow.
And behold, seven other kind came up after them, poor and very ill-favored and lean-fleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt, for badness.
And the lean and the ill-favored kind did eat up the first seven fat kind. And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them, but they were still ill-favored, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
And I saw in my dream, and behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good. And behold, seven ears, withered thin and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them.
And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears. And I told this unto the magicians, but there was none that could declare it to me.
And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one. God hath showed Pharaoh what he is about to do. The seven good kind are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years. The dream is one.
And the seven thin and ill-favored kind that came up after them are seven years, and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh. What God is about to do he showeth unto Pharaoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt, and there shall arise after them seven years of famine, and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt, and the famine shall consume the land, and the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following, for it shall be very grievous.
And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice. It is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt. Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.
And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities. And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, but shall be in the land of Egypt, that the land perish not through the famine.
And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants. And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, For as much as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art. Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled. Only in the throne will I be greater than thou.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck. And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had, and they cried before him, Bow the knee, and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnath-Peyonea, and he gave him to wife, Azenith, the daughter of Potipharo, priest of Ann. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt. And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls. And he gathered up all the food of the seven years which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities. The food of the field which was round about every city laid he up in the same.
And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea very much until he left numbering, for it was without number. And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came which Azenith, the daughter of Potipharo, priest of Ann, bare unto him. And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh, for God said he hath made me forget all my toil and all my father's house.
And the name of the second called he Ephraim, for God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction. And the seven years of plenteousness that was in the land of Egypt were ended.
And the seven years of Darth began to come, according as Joseph had said. And the Darth was in all lands, but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread. And Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph what he saith to you, do.
And the famine was over all the face of the earth, and Joseph opened all the storehouses and sold unto the Egyptians, and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt. And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn, because that the famine was so sore in all lands.
Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons,
Why do ye look one upon another? And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt. Get you down thither, and buy for us from thence, that we may live and not die.
And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt. But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren, for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.
And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came, for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
And Joseph was the governor of the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land. And Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.
And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them. And he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan, to buy food.
And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies, to see the nakedness of the land, ye are come.
And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come. We are all one man's sons. We are true men, thy servants are no spies.
And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land, ye are come.
And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan. And behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.
And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies. Hereby ye shall be proved. By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you. Or else, by the life of Pharaoh, surely ye are spies.
And he put them all together into ward three days.
And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do and live, for I fear God. If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison. Go ye carry corn for the famine of your houses.
But bring your youngest brother unto me, so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die.
And they did so.
And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear. Therefore is this distress come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child, and ye would not hear. Therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
And they knew not that Joseph understood them, for he spake unto them by an interpreter.
And he turned himself about from them, and wept, and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.
Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way. And thus did he unto them.
And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence. And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money, for behold, it was in his sack's mouth.
And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored, and lo, it is even in my sack. And their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?
And they came unto Jacob their father, unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them, saying, The man who is the lord of the land spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.
And we said unto him, We are true men, we are no spies. We be twelve brethren sons of our father. One is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men. Leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone.
And bring your youngest brother unto me, then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men. So will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffic in the land.
And it came to pass, as they emptied their sacks, that behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack, and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.
And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away. All these things are against me.
And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons if I bring him not to thee. Deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
And he said, My son shall not go down with you, for his brother is dead, and he is left alone. If mischief befall him by the way in which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
And the famine was sore in the land, and it came to pass when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.
And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, He shall not see my face, except your brother be with you. If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food. But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down, for the man said unto us, He shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
And they said, The man asked us straightly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? Have ye another brother? And we told him, according to the tenor of these words, Could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go, that we may live and not die, both we and thou and also our little ones. I will be surety for him. Of my hand shalt thou require him. If I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever. For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.
And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this. Take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and myrrh, nuts and almonds.
And take double money in your hand, and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand. Peradventure, it was an oversight. Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man. And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.
And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin, and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph. And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready, for these men shall dine with me at noon.
And the man did as Joseph bad, and the man brought the men into Joseph's house. And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's house. And they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks, at the first time are we brought in, that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.
And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they communed with him at the door of the house, and said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food. And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight, and we have brought it again in our hand.
And other money we brought down in our hands to buy food, we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks. And he said, Peace be to you, fear not, your God, and the God of your Father, hath given you treasure in your sacks, I had your money.
And he brought Simeon out unto them. And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet, and he gave their asses provender. And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon, for they heard that they should eat bread there.
And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present, which was in their hand, into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth. And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?
And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.
And Joseph made haste, for his bowels did yearn upon his brother, and he sought where to weep, and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.
And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him by themselves, because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth, and the men marvelled one at another.
And he took and sent messes unto them from before him, but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs, and they drank, and were merry with him.
And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth.
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.
And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men, and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?
Is not this it, in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth, he have done evil in so doing?
And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.
And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words, God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing. Behold the money which we found in our sack's mouths we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan. How then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondman.
And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words, he with whom it is found shall be my servant, and ye shall be blameless.
Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.
And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest, and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
Then they rent their clothes, and laid at every man his ass, and returned to the city.
And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house, for he was yet there, and they fell before him on the ground.
And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? What ye not, that such a man as I can certainly divine?
And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? What shall we speak, or how shall we clear ourselves?
God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants. Behold, we are my lord's servants, both we and he also with whom the cup is found.
And he said, God forbid that I should do so, but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant, and ask for you, get you up in peace unto your father.
Then Judah came near unto him, and said, O my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thy anger burn against thy servant, for thou art even his Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father or a brother? And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one, and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him. And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father, for if he should leave his father, his father would die.
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother, come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
And it came to pass, when we came up unto thy servant, my father, we told him the words of my lord. And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food. And we said, We cannot go down, if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down, for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us.
And thy servant, my father, said unto us, Ye know that my wife bear me two sons, and the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces, and I saw him not since. And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
Now therefore, when I come to thy servant, my father, and the lad be not with us, seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life, it shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die, and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.
For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father forever. Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant bide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord, and let the lad go up with his brethren. For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me, lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father?
Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him, and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren. And he wept aloud, and the Egyptians in the house of Pharaoh heard.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph, doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him, for they were troubled at his presence.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph, your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither, for God did send me before you to preserve life.
For these two years hath the famine been in the land, and yet there are five years in the which there shall neither be earring nor harvest. And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God. And he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt, come down unto me, tarry not.
And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast. And there will I nourish thee, for yet there are five years of famine, lest thou and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.
And behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen, and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.
And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept, and Benjamin wept upon his neck. Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them, and after that his brethren talked with him.
And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come. And it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye, lay your beasts, and go, get you into the land of Canaan, and take your father and your households, and come unto me, and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
Now thou art commanded, This do ye, take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come. Also regard not your stuff, for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.
And the children of Israel did so, and Joseph gave them wagons according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way. To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.
And to his father he sent after this manner, ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she-asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.
So he sent his brethren away, and they departed, and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.
And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father, and told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not.
And they told him all the words of Joseph which he had said unto them, and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived. And Israel said, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, I will go and see him before I die.
www.logoslibrary.org
And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and offered
sacrifices unto the God of his father, Isaac.
And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob.
And he said, Here am I.
And he said, I am God, the God of thy father.
Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.
I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also surely bring thee up again, and
Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
And Jacob rose up from Beersheba, and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father,
and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry
him.
And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan,
and came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him, his sons and his sons' sons with
him, his daughters and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into
Egypt.
And these are the names of the children of Israel which came into Egypt, Jacob and his
sons, Reuben, Jacob's first born, and the sons of Reuben, Hainach and Falu and Hezren
and Carmi, and the sons of Simeon, Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jakin and Zohar and
and the sons of Levi, Gershon, Kohath and Marari, and the sons of Judah, Ur and Onan
and Shelah and Phares and Zirah, but Ur and Onan died in the land of Canaan, and the sons
of Phares were Hezren and Hamel, and the sons of Issachar, Tola and Fuva and Job and Shimron,
and the sons of Zebulon, Seiread and Elan and Jahlil. These be the sons of Leah which
she bear unto Jacob and Paedon Aram with his daughter Dinah, all the souls of his sons
and his daughters were thirty and three.
And the sons of Gad, Ziphion and Haggai, Shunai and Esben, Eri and Erodai and Erili, and the
sons of Biraeah, Heber and Malkiel. These are the sons of Zilpah whom Laban gave to
Leah his daughter and these she bear unto Jacob even sixteen souls. The sons of Rachel
Jacob's wife, Joseph and Benjamin, and unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh
and Ephraim which Azaneth the daughter of Potipharah, priest of An, bear unto him. And
the sons of Benjamin were Bela and Beker and Ashbel, Gira and Naaman, Ehai and Rosh, Muppim
and Huppim and Ard. These are the sons of Rachel which were born to Jacob, all the souls
were fourteen.
And the sons of Dan, Hushim, and the sons of Naphtali, Jaziel and Gunai and Jezer and
Shilam. These are the sons of Bilhah which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter and she
bear these unto Jacob. All the souls were seven. All the souls that came with Jacob
into Egypt which came out of his loins besides Jacob's son's wives, all the souls were threescore
and six. And the sons of Joseph which were born him in Egypt were two souls. All the
souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were threescore and ten. And he sent
Judah before him unto Joseph to direct his face unto Goshen and they came into the land
of Goshen. And Joseph made ready his chariot and went up to meet Israel his father to Goshen
and presented himself unto him and he fell on his neck and wept on his neck a good while.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die since I have seen thy face because thou art
yet alive. And Joseph said unto his brethren and unto his father's house, I will go up
and show Pharaoh and say unto him, My brethren and my father's house which were in the land
of Canaan are come unto me. And the men are shepherds for their trade hath been to feed
cattle and they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have. And
it shall come to pass when Pharaoh shall call you and shall say, What is your occupation?
That ye shall say, Thy servant's trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until
now, both we and also our fathers. That ye may dwell in the land of Goshen for every
shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh and said, My father and my brethren and their
flocks and their herds and all that they have are come out of the land of Canaan and behold
they are in the land of Goshen. And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And
they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we and also our fathers. They said moreover
unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come, for thy servants have no pasture
for their flocks, for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan. Now therefore we pray
thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee,
the land of Egypt is before thee, in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to
dwell, in the land of Goshen let them dwell, and if thou knowest any men of activity among
them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed
Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?
And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and
thirty years. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.
And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of
Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Ramesses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
And Joseph nourished his father and his brethren, and all his father's household with bread,
according to their families. And there was no bread in all the land, for
the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted
by reason of the famine. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land
of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought, and Joseph brought
the money into Pharaoh's house. And when money failed in the land of Egypt and in the land
of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread, for why should we
die in thy presence? for the money faileth. And Joseph said, Give your cattle, and I will
give you for your cattle, if money fail. And they brought their cattle unto Joseph, and
Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of
the herds, and for the asses, and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.
When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will
not hide it from my Lord, how that our money is spent. My Lord also hath our herds of cattle.
There is not aught left in the sight of my Lord, but our bodies and our lands. Wherefore
shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and
we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh. And give us seed that we may live and not
die, that the land be not desolate. And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh,
for the Egyptians sold every man his field because the famine prevailed over them, so
the land became Pharaoh's. And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one
end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof. Only the land of the priests
bought he not, for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their
portion which Pharaoh gave them, wherefore they sold not their lands. Then Joseph said
unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh. Lo, here
is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land. And it shall come to pass in the increase
that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed
of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your
little ones. And they said, Thou hast saved our lives. Let us find grace in the sight
of my Lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants. And Joseph made it a law over the land of
Egypt unto this day that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests
only, which became not Pharaoh's. And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt in the country
of Goshen, and they had possessions therein, and grew and multiplied exceedingly. And Jacob
lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years, so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty
and seven years. And the time drew nigh that Israel must die, and he called his son Joseph,
and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under
my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt. But I
will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying
place. And he said, I will do as thou hast said. And he said, Swear unto me. And he
swear unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.
And it came to pass after these things that
one told Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick. And he took with him his two sons Manasseh
and Ephraim. And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee. And
Israel strengthened himself and sat upon the bed.
And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and
blessed me, and said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and
I will make of thee a multitude of people, and will give this land to thy seed after
thee for an everlasting possession. And now thy two sons Ephraim and Manasseh,
which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine.
As Reuben and Simeon they shall be mine. And thy issue, which thou begettest after them,
shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren and their inheritance.
And as for me, when I came from Paden, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way,
when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath, and I buried her there in the
way of Ephrath, the same as Bethlehem. And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said,
Who were these? And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in
this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see, and he brought them
near unto him, and he kissed them, and embraced them. And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not
thought to see thy face, and lo, God hath showed me also thy seed. And Joseph brought
them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth. And Joseph
took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in
his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him. And Israel
stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger,
and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly, for Manasseh was the
first born. And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac
did walk, the God which fed me all my life long, unto this day, the angel which redeemed
me from all evil, bless the lads, and let my name be named on them, and the name of
my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the
earth. And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim,
it displeased him, and he held up his father's hand to remove it from Ephraim's head unto
Manasseh's head. And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father, for this is the
first born, put thy right hand upon his head. And his father refused, and said, I know it,
my son, I know it. He also shall become a people, and he also shall be great. But truly
his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude
of nations. And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying,
God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh, and he set Ephraim before Manasseh. And Israel
said unto Joseph, Behold, I die, but God shall be with you and bring you again unto the land
of your fathers. Moreover, I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which
I took out of the hand of the Amorite, with my sword and with my bow.
And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather
yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days. Gather
yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob, and hearken unto Israel, your father.
Reuben, thou art my first born, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency
of dignity, and the excellency of power. Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel, because thou
wentest up to thy father's bed, then defiledst thou it. He went up to my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my
soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united,
for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall. Cursed
be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel, I will divide them
in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, thy hand shall be in the neck of
thine enemies, thy father's children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a lion's whelp.
From the prey, my son, thou art gone up. He stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as
an old lion, who shall rouse him up? The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver
from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of the people
be. Binding his foal unto the vine, and his asses colt unto the choice-vine, he washed
his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes. His eyes shall be red with
wine, and his teeth white with milk. Zebulon shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and he
shall be for an haven of ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon. Issachar is a strong
ass couching down between two burdens, and he saw that rest was good, and the land that
it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. Dan
shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a serpent by the way,
an adder in the path, that biteth the horse-heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. I have
waited for thy salvation, O Lord. Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome
at the last. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal deities.
Naphtali is a hind let loose, he giveth goodly words. Joseph is a fruitful bow, even a fruitful
bow by a well, whose branches run over the wall. The archers have sorely grieved him,
and shot at him, and hated him. But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. From thence is the shepherd
the stone of Israel. Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee, and by the Almighty,
who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under,
blessings of the breasts, and of the womb. The blessings of thy father have prevailed
above the blessings of my progenitors, unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills.
They shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate
from his brethren. Benjamin shall raven as a wolf. In the morning he shall devour the
prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel,
and this is it that their fathers spake unto them, and blessed them. Everyone according
to his blessing, he blessed them. And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered
unto my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the
Hittite, in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, and the
land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite, for a possession
of a burying place. There they buried Abraham, and Sarah his wife. There they buried Isaac
and Rebekah his wife, and there I buried Leah. The purchase of the field, and of the cave
that is therein, was from the children of Heth. And when Jacob had made an end of commanding
his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered
unto his people.
And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and
stepped upon him, and kissed him. And Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to
embalm his father, and the physicians embalmed Israel. And forty days were fulfilled for
him, for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed, and the Egyptians mourned
for him three score and ten days. And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph
spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak,
I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die,
in my grave which I have digged for me, in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury
me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.
And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
And Joseph went up to bury his father, and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh,
the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt, and all the house of
Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's house. Only their little ones, and their flocks,
and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen. And there went up with him both chariots
and horsemen, and it was a very great company. And they came to the threshing floor of Atad,
which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation, and
he made a mourning for his father seven days. And when the inhabitants of the land, the
grievous mourning to the Egyptians, wherefore the name of it was called Abel-Misraim, which
is beyond Jordan. And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them, for his sons
carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah,
which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burying-place of Ephra on
the Hittite, before Mamre. And Joseph returned into Egypt, he and his brethren, and all that
went up with him, to bury his father, after he had buried his father. And when Joseph's
brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and
will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him. And they sent a messenger
unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying, So shall ye say unto
Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren and their sin, for they did
unto thee evil, and now we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of
thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him. And his brethren also went and fell
down before his face, and they said, Behold, we be thy servants. And Joseph said unto them,
Fear not, for am I in the place of God. But as for you ye thought evil against me, but
God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
Now therefore fear ye not, I will nourish you and your little ones. And he comforted
them and spake kindly unto them. And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his father's house.
And Joseph lived and a hundred and ten years. And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third
generation. The children also of Maker, the son of Manasseh, were brought up upon Joseph's
knees. And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die, and God will surely visit you and bring
you out of this land, unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you,
and he shall carry up my bones from hence. So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years
old, and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.